website/content/en/docs/tools/boilerplate.md, before:

---
title: "Boilerplate (Gruntwork)"
slug: boilerplate
weight: 3
---


[Gruntwork Boilerplate](https://github.com/gruntwork-io/boilerplate) is a tool that helps you create and manage reusable templates for your code and configuration. It allows you to define a template once and then generate new files or projects from it by filling in variables.

## Usage in this Project

This project uses Gruntwork Boilerplate to maintain consistency and speed up the creation of new components, particularly for Ansible roles.

*   **Ansible Role Template**: A template for new Ansible roles is located in `.boilerplates/ansible-role/`. This includes a standard directory structure, placeholder files, and common configuration.
*   **Generating New Roles**: You can use the `boilerplate` CLI (installable via `./bin/bash/setup.sh boilerplate`) to generate a new Ansible role from this template.

This helps ensure that all Ansible roles follow a similar structure, making them easier to understand and maintain.

Commit message:

Add tutorial sections to tool documentation (#77)
This commit adds a new "Tutorial" section to the documentation for each tool:
- 1password-cli.md
- boilerplate.md
- hugo.md
- pre-commit.md

Each tutorial section provides a concrete example of how to use the respective tool, aiming to give you a better understanding of its capabilities before learning about its specific usage within the project.

Co-authored-by: google-labs-jules[bot] <161369871+google-labs-jules[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

website/content/en/docs/tools/boilerplate.md, after:

---
title: "Boilerplate (Gruntwork)"
slug: boilerplate
weight: 3
---


[Gruntwork Boilerplate](https://github.com/gruntwork-io/boilerplate) is a tool that helps you create and manage reusable templates for your code and configuration. It allows you to define a template once and then generate new files or projects from it by filling in variables.

## Tutorial

Here's an example of how to use `boilerplate` to generate a new Ansible role from the template in this project:

```bash
# Navigate to the directory where you want to create the new role
cd ansible/roles/

# Run boilerplate, pointing to the template and providing necessary variables
boilerplate --template-url ../../.boilerplates/ansible-role/ --var role_name=my-new-role
```

Make sure the example aligns with the project's actual boilerplate usage if possible, for example, by referencing the `.boilerplates/ansible-role/` path.

## Usage in this Project

This project uses Gruntwork Boilerplate to maintain consistency and speed up the creation of new components, particularly for Ansible roles.

*   **Ansible Role Template**: A template for new Ansible roles is located in `.boilerplates/ansible-role/`. This includes a standard directory structure, placeholder files, and common configuration.
*   **Generating New Roles**: You can use the `boilerplate` CLI (installable via `./bin/bash/setup.sh boilerplate`) to generate a new Ansible role from this template.

This helps ensure that all Ansible roles follow a similar structure, making them easier to understand and maintain.
